[music] From the New York Times, I'm
Michael Bubaro. This is a special
episode of The Daily. [music]
>> The golden age of America begins right
now.
>> It's been exactly one year since
President Trump was sworn into office
for a second term.
>> The fraudsters, liars, cheaters,
globalists, and deep state bureaucrats
are being sent packing.
>> A year in which he fired. Well,
President Trump says he is firing Fed
Governor [music] Lisa Cook over
>> millions of federal workers are being
offered buyout,
>> prosecuted,
>> secured the [music] indictments of James
Comey and Leticia James.
>> And I think she's a total crook. There's
no question about it.
>> 1,500 pardons for the January [music]
6th defendants.
>> These were people that actually love our
country. So tariff
>> going to be liberation day in America
and brokered
>> President Trump's ceasefire [music] and
hostage release deal.
>> Pressured. You're not in a good
position. You [music] don't have the
cards right now.
>> Directed Justice Department lawyers to
be ready to tell the courts [music] f
you
>> deployed um deploying the National Guard
to help reestablish law.
>> Fortified [music] border crossings have
gone just way down apprehension
>> and deported his way to a new American
government.
>> Okay. Do you have some ID then please?
Ice
>> designed entirely in his [music] image.
>> Do you see any checks on your power on
the world stage? Is there anything that
could stop you if you wanted to?
>> Yeah, there's one thing. My own
morality.
Today [music] in the first of a series
of episodes evaluating the past year, we
begin by turning to three of my
colleagues, [music] Maggie Haberman,
Jonathan Swan, and Charlie Savage.
[music]
It's Tuesday, January 20th.
Maggie, Jonathan, Charlie,
welcome back.
>> Thank you, Michael.
>> Hello. Good to be back. We come to the
three of you on the occasion of this
presidential term reaching its one-year
mark. Always a moment for reflection,
perhaps never more so than the extremely
eventful first year of Donald Trump's
second term. And all three of you
covered Trump's first term and then you
co-reported a series about what we
should all expect from his second term,
much of which came to pass. And as it
happens, all three of you are now
working on books about Trump and his
presidency. So, you're thinking big
thoughts, or at least we're hoping that
you're thinking big thoughts.
>> Thank you for the encouragement.
>> You're uniquely positioned, we think, to
have this conversation. Hope you agree.
So, we wanted to start by asking you for
the right big framework for thinking
about this first year of Donald Trump's
second term. And Jonathan, let me start
with you there. Where I start
conceptually with Trump is basically
where we started with our series in
2023, which is the first big idea that
we put out there based on our reporting,
based on talking to all the people
around Trump was that a second term of
Donald Trump would involve extravagant
uses of executive power.
>> In some cases, possibly unprecedented
use of executive power. And it became
very clear early on that that's exactly
what was coming to bear. There were just
so many aggressive actions happening at
once. It was happening in his
immigration actions, in his use of
tariffs. We saw it in the way that he
attacked civil society, the way that he
squeezed universities.
We have agencies within the executive
branch that either by law or by custom
are understood to be independent from
executive authority from the president
himself. He completely jettisoned that.
You have a situation where he is
directing the attorney general to
prosecute named individuals,
>> something that we haven't seen in this
country before. You also had him sort of
jawboning the FCC to go after certain
media companies. Again, agencies that
are either by statute or by norm
independent no longer are independent.
You know, we've all forgotten Doge now,
but that was an extraordinary expression
of executive authority. So, it's already
a year in a profoundly transformational
presidency. And when I think about it,
it all comes back to this conception of
power that power belongs to Donald Trump
and that any checks upon his power are
illegitimate and ought to be bulldozed.
Maggie, what's the framework you have
been using for this first year?
>> Oh, I agree with everything Jonathan
said and I just will add a few things.
One is there [snorts] is this sort of
personalization of power where not only
targeting his enemies, perceived enemies
I should say, for prosecution through
the DOJ, but targeting law firms that he
felt agrieved by or some of his own
lawyers felt agrieved by with threats of
executive orders or actual executive
orders. He is clearly in sort of a he is
owed his due phase where he believes he
was harmed and he believes that he
should have some kind of compensation
for that literally in the sense that he
wants the DOJ and he openly said this to
give him a settlement for some of the
investigations into him. He runs this
justice department
>> right? He wants the United States
Department of Justice, which he
oversees, to literally financially
compensate him for a previous legal
grievance he has.
>> And and not a small amount, we should
say.
>> No. Well, I mean, the claim was, I think
it was $230 million. Usually settlements
are not that much, but whatever it is,
it will be more than zero. You know, you
go back all the way to earlier in the
year, a story that Jonathan and I did
with Eric Lipton about Trump's
frustration about not having the new Air
Force ones that he had commissioned, the
planes in term one that are delayed
because of all kinds of issues. So
instead, he's being the government, I
should say, is being gifted a luxury jet
that was owned by the once owned by the
Qatari royal family. his government
found this creative way to have it given
to the defense department and then it's
just going to be gifted to his
presidential library and he says that he
doesn't plan to fly it afterwards and
some of his own advisers privately say
they find that hard to believe. So, so
you can run the gamut on this of ways in
which he sees himself as owed a due.
That is the frame through which I am
seeing a lot of this
>> the personalization of power. Yeah,
>> I think another element of this that's
really important if you sort of think
about it under the, you know,
reparations for Donald Trump umbrella is
in this second term, he's thinking a lot
about legacy and building monuments to
himself, but the money is being
extracted from corporate America. Why
are they spending all this money? Well,
he's building this big ballroom which
will be seen as Donald Trump's ballroom
at the White House. Why are corporations
donating 5 million, 10 million? They're
doing it out of fear. Obviously.
Obviously. I mean, we talked to a lot of
people who represent and work at a
senior level at different corporations.
This is small change for them knowing
that this is a president who's perfectly
willing to use the federal government to
hurt them, help them. And what you're
diagnosing here, I think, is kind of
fascinating to bring it together with
what you said, Maggie. The president is
personalizing power, and that becomes
self-reinforcing. He personalized
revenge. Correct. And what does that do?
It ends up encouraging the targets or
the avoiding targets of that revenge to
then fund the self-immortalization
side of the personalization of the
presidency. And it becomes a virtuous
cycle for him.
>> Exactly. You also had him, you know,
renaming the Kennedy Center, the Trump
Kennedy Center, making the Institute of
Peace, the Donald J. Trump Institute of
Peace. In many ways, it's these are
things that I can do with the
presidency. There's no legal impediment,
so I'm going to do them. He wants to
rename Dallasos airport the Trump
airport. He wants a version of the
Arctic triumph, which they call
internally the Arctic Trump built. So,
that's a big part of this. It's putting
his imprint, his physical imprint, on
Washington DC. And you guys all screwed
me last time. you know, you stole the
election, you tried to put me in jail,
and I'm back. And guess what? You have
to reckon with me now, and I'm just
going to rub this in your faces. And one
thing about Donald Trump is he knows how
to use power aggressively. Correct. And
that's the story of this first year is
Donald Trump aggressively
asserting power and largely succeeding.
>> And Charlie, what is your framework for
thinking about this? We're talking about
power and its consolidation. We're
talking about the personalization of
that power,
>> right? So, a running theme in what
Jonathan Maggie you've been talking
about is Trump exercising power until
somebody stops him. And Congress right
now controlled by a Republican party
that is completely in his thrral.
Clearly, he's not going to stop him.
There will be an election later this
year. We'll see if at least one chamber
flips. then there could start to be
significant, you know, meaningful
oversight investigations. Although we
saw that in the first Trump term and the
answer to those investigations were
stonewalling of subpoenas and such. And
so if Congress currently it clearly is
going to do nothing and you know the
question arises whether even under
Democratic control it can effectively do
something that leaves you with the
courts,
>> right? And the big question being to
what extent is this judiciary going to
ratify
or at least not stand in the way of
these extraordinary myriad ways in which
he's assuming and exercising powers that
were not previously clearly understood
to reside in the White House.
>> It's it's a little hard to talk about
this right now because a lot of the
litigation over this stuff is
unresolved. A lot of people think it is
possible that the court may strike down
his unilateral imposition of import
taxes or tariffs and that may be a big
exception to an overall pattern. But
from the vantage point right now, for
the most part, while he has been stymied
initially by lower court judges a lot,
when stuff has reached the Supreme
Court, it has by and large allowed him
to do what he wants to do.
>> Right. And just to distill what you're
saying, the courts, especially the high
court, the Supreme Court, has and
appears poised to continue to ratify,
codify, whatever you want to call it,
this expanded power of this presidency,
which is much greater than probably any
modern presidency. I mean, can I just
ask that question, Jonathan? Is there a
precedent that you can think of for the
exercise of this level of power by the
president?
>> Well, we have lots of precedents of
presidents. I mean, of course, everyone
references Franklin Roosevelt and him
breaking a lot of norms, very aggressive
use of executive power with the New Deal
programs.
>> Endorsed by Congress though, big
difference.
>> Definitely. And and when you've seen
huge abuses in the past, it's generally
been in wartime. So, you know, Woodro
Wilson, there were terrible abuses
against the press and civil society,
unions, obviously Franklin Roosevelt
with the internment camps. But again, in
nonwart time, we're not in the middle of
a great depression. There is no
precedent for the breadth of aggressive
assertion of executive power and even
many of the instances of executive power
that we're seeing used right now by
Donald Trump. M
>> and I think there's another point that's
really important that we haven't talked
about yet, which is one reason why I
think it's very likely that Donald Trump
ends up being the most consequential
president of our lifetimes is that it
seems to me very unlikely that we go
back to the way it was before after this
experience. We're in an environment
where there's not a huge constituency
for a restorationist president for
people to say, "Oh, actually, I really
hope the next president will voluntarily
restrain themselves and exercise
prudence and respect the balance of
powers." What's far more likely is that
if the other side gets in, if Democrats
get in, that their voters are going to
want to see a president use all of these
extravagant powers for their
>> policy desires and policy goals.
That is a very appealing thing. And so
you you've seen now Trump act
unilaterally in all sorts of ways that
has now opened up a new panorama for
every other leader who follows him. Are
we going to see a reaction like we saw
post Nixon, you know, where Carter
essentially ran on good government
restraint and all this sort of stuff?
>> I don't know. It's a very different
context. It's a very different context
than it was back then. And so I think
Trump is more likely to have set a
precedent that will be followed, perhaps
even expanded upon, as hard as that
might be to imagine, than it is that
will have some sort of restoration uh to
the way it was after Donald Trump,
>> right? That Humpty Dumpty doesn't get
put back together again.
>> Totally. And I think Jonathan raises a
really important point, which is that in
this world we're living in now where
both parties, I'm not saying it's taking
place exactly the same way or exactly
the same levels, but they're radicalized
about each other. You know, January 6th
was a radicalizing day for Democrats and
some Republicans who lived through it in
the capital. Trump and his advisers have
been radicalized by two assassination
attempts,
>> two impeachment efforts,
>> two impeachment efforts, uh various
indictments, all of them getting
subpoenaed. many of his advisers and
many people who worked in that White
House unable to get jobs after they
left. So, everybody is on heightened
alert and everybody thinks that their
use of power is the right one. If I do
it this way, it's because it's for the
right cause. If I could jump in just for
a second, you know, I a lot of my work
chronicling executive power going back
to the Cheney experiences in the 70s and
how that informed the Bush
administration and so forth
>> has centered around this idea that
executive power acts like a one-way
ratchet and that it's easier to make it
larger than to roll it back again
because whatever one guy does, the next
guy takes as a baseline and then
innovates further and then that becomes
the new baseline.
And I think that is a truth about what
we see in the growth of executive power,
not just under Trump, but under the
generations leading up to this moment.
So if Jonathan and Maggie are right and
there is a Democratic president who also
jettisonens all this caring about the
rule of law and in checks and balances
and norms of self- constraint that would
fit that pattern. When you say it's
appealing, I mean, possibly it's
appealing in the moment in the in the
crowd yelling at the rally. I think it's
profoundly unappealing in terms of a
recipe for a country that is not
literally go to war with itself
>> because it means that every if if
everyone whoever is in power is
completely unconstrained and there are
no checks and balances and the rule of
law means nothing and there are no
norms, then it's existential that that
side stays in power.
>> Exactly. and the other side comes in,
then that side thinks it's going to go
to prison because they just broke all
these laws. There has to be a war to
prevent the other side from coming in.
>> It's a government of it's a government
in which you have to annihilate your
opponents.
>> Charlie, when I talk to certain people
around Trump, that's where they are
psychologically right now. That the next
election is for all the marbles. They
cannot it's it's in it's intolerable the
thought of losing power because of that
dynamic. I agree with I'm not saying
it's appealing to me. I'm saying the the
idea of an energetic man of action in
the presidency who can click his fingers
and make things happen is very appealing
and I think we're very naive to think
that it's not. So just to end the first
half of this really fascinating
conversation, can we call it officially
a year into this second term that our
democracy, our democratic system has
fundamentally changed? that we can't
with a straight face say based on
everything you have all laid out here
that we're really talking about three
separate but equal branches of
government given the consolidation the
personalization and the codification of
power in this presidency it's obviously
absurd to say that we're looking at
three equally like look at Congress I
mean how could you possibly argue with a
straight face that Congress is a
separate co-equal branch in the way it's
been operating. I mean, it's an
absurdity. So, you know, I can't imagine
how you could in an intellectually
honest way make that case.
>> And if we're going to ratchet it up,
Charlie, if it only goes in one
direction, doesn't that mean something
fundamental has changed here in the
American system of democracy?
>> It's hard to say that this is like a
permanent entrenchment of what we saw in
the year 2025 is the way it's always
going to be going forward. Now I think
certainly though the American style
system of democracy and checks and
balances and separated institutions
wielding co-equal control over the
government is not how America has
functioned in the first year of the
Trump second term.
And you know the whole system is very
sick right now.
Well, when we [music] come back, we're
going to talk about how much of this
first term and the president's use of
power, to my surprise, [music]
wonder if it's to yours as well, ended
up happening overseas.
We'll be right back.
Charlie and Maggie and Jonathan, as I
said before the break, one of the most
surprising qualities of this first year
of his second term has been the way that
the president has used this consolidated
power overseas. And let me just offer a
few reminders that you may not even
need. He has deployed US bombers to take
out Iran's nuclear facilities. He has
intervened in the war between Israel and
Gaza and successfully pushed for a peace
deal that released the hostages there.
He has tried to negotiate peace between
Russia and Ukraine. He has used special
forces to take out Nicholas Maduro. He
has threatened to take over Greenland.
This was a lot of emphasis not on
America. I think the problem with the
list you just laid out, Michael, is that
it contains very conventional
expressions of, you know, presidential
power in an area where there is a lot of
leeway, you know, in terms of the
ability to conduct foreign policy. So,
it is completely conventional for a
president to try to negotiate the end to
a war in any part of the world. where we
get into really, to use the word again,
extravagant uses of power is in the
areas that Charlie has been reporting on
so much, which is declaring just because
Donald Trump says so that people who are
transporting cocaine on boats are armed
combatants and terrorists and therefore
I won't arrest them, I will just blow
them up and kill them. or you know
sending Delta Force in to remove a
foreign sovereign. Those are the areas
where he's really testing things in a
lot of the other areas that you
mentioned. I think it's quite
conventional the way that he's using
power.
>> That's very helpful that distinction. I
mean, Charlie, since Jonathan brings it
up and dismisses much of my list as
conventional, but zeros in,
>> I would throw bombing Iran into the list
of things that are across the line, but
certainly negotiating peace deals is
not.
>> And when you say cross the line,
describe what you mean and why it
matters because presidents of the United
States have always, as Jonathan has
said, exercised an extraordinary amount
of discretion when it comes to the use
of the US military. Well, presidents of
both parties going back have carved out
for themselves an ability to use
American military force abroad
unilaterally without going to Congress
under certain circumstances. The
circumstances are basically incidences
where there's a national interest in the
anticipated scope, duration, nature of
the hostilities fall short of war in the
constitutional sense. So, one-off air
strikes, peacekeeping operations,
small-cale interventions,
Bombing Iran was seen as across the line
because it created such a risk of a
major regional conflration that the
anticipated risk that it could lead to a
full-scale war meant Congress needed to
be involved from the beginning if we
were going to cross that line.
>> The boat strikes and the Venezuela
Maduro operation certainly in that
category. Trump is assuming for himself
the power to essentially order the
summary extrajudicial executions of
people who had always been treated as
criminal suspects and the crime they are
suspected of committing not even a
capital offense that is drug
trafficking.
>> Mhm.
>> He's done so through a sort of conjuring
into existence legal realities, you
know, realities in quotation marks. I
determine that there is an legal formal
state of armed conflict with a secret
list of drug cartels and criminal gangs
and that therefore the people on boats
suspected of smuggling narcotics for
them are not criminals. They are
combatants and therefore it is lawful
for me to direct the US military to kill
them summarily. I mean that's an
extraordinary thing. No one thinks that
outside of the government that there is
actually an armed conflict, but who's
going to challenge him inside the
government? Clearly, the military is
not, especially because their Jag core
has been gutted by Secretary of Defense
Pete Hex.
>> Jagore are the lawyers in the military
who might issue opinions saying don't do
that. whose purpose is to provide legal
advice to military commanders about
obeying the law. And the law says
militaries are not allowed to target
civilians even if they are suspected of
crimes if they pose no imminent threat.
That is murder and peace time. That is a
war crime in an armed conflict.
Nevertheless, the military is doing what
Trump is telling them to do. And now
with the raid into Venezuela,
using ground troops on the sovereign
soil of another country in a place where
they killed 80 people and affectuated
regime change.
And he says he can do that too in this
case under the guise of being a law
enforcement operation. So they can
combat drug smugglers by saying that's
not a law enforcement investigation,
that's war. and then they can send
troops in to the foreign territory of
another country without congressional
authorization by saying that's not war,
that is just a law enforcement
operation. It's just an extraordinary
set of events. It is a demonstration of
the theme we were talking about in the
first half of this of you can just do
stuff and especially if you've hired the
right lawyers who are not going to raise
objections but are going to find ways to
produce a piece of paper with some words
on it that says yes you can do what you
want to do who's going to stop you
>> Jonathan what may unify these
interventions if anything and I'm going
to be a little bit provocative here is
that for now they have seemed to turn
out pretty well for the United States.
And let me just give you some examples.
When we think about the president's
approach to foreign affairs this entire
past year, it ends with a NATO that's
paying more than ever for its own
defense, which therefore puts less
burden on the US Treasury. The United
States is now feared by Latin American
leaders who have major problems with
drug cartels. And we're seeing that
those governments, look at Mexico for
example, it turns out, can do a heck of
a lot more to fight those cartels when
they feel threatened by Donald Trump. So
just reckon with that for a minute that
as legally dubious as some of these
actions have been, they do appear to
serve the US national interest. Well, I
don't find this difficult to reckon with
at all. And this is kind of the point I
was getting at earlier, which is that
just because something is unlawful or at
least legally contested doesn't mean
that it's not appealing or doesn't get
some good for America. So the two major
military operations that he has
authorized in Iran and in Venezuela
resulted in no American service members
dying. I mean, whatever you think about
the operation to get rid of Maduro,
whether you think it was wise, it was an
astonishing display of military prowess.
And if you're Donald Trump and you pull
off such spectacular
military successes and then get the
reinforcement of the praise and the
fear,
>> it's self-reinforcing. And that's why
you see him now saying, "Well, what
about Greenland? What about Cuba? What
about a regime change in Iran? Is he
just going to continue to get lucky in
all these circumstances? We don't know.
We're still very early in the
presidency. But what I would say to your
point about, you know, looking at this
holistically, it's true that the
Europeans are now spending more on their
defense. Donald Trump has managed to get
them to do something that other
presidents have not, and he should be
credited for that. But what's also true,
if you're looking at this with cold,
clear eyes, is that America's
traditional allies will not go back to
the way they were in terms of trusting
America and the nature of those
alliances that predated at least the
second Trump presidency because they can
always know that America could go back
to this point. Even if we do get some
restorationist type figure who's saying
NATO's, you know, everyone needs to hold
hands, they've now had this lived
experience of an American president that
says we're going to take this territory
and, you know, to hell with you. You're
just going to have to live with it. So,
it's very hard to make long-term
assessments about the American national
interest right now, a year into the
Donald Trump presidency. There are going
to be areas where Donald Trump's
approach to power extracts positive
things for America. There are also going
to potentially be costs
>> and maybe even very significant costs to
the way that he's acting on the global
stage. Maggie, to bring it back to the
domestic front for a moment, one of the
riddles of the second term is that this
is a president, and I looking at you
because you literally wrote a biography
of him, who deeply craves approval and
affirmation. [clears throat]
And yet polling shows that voters
approval of him on a wide variety of key
issues from the economy to immigration
to some of his overseas interventions
has been on the decline throughout this
first year of his second term. And the
question to me anyway is why is this
second term being defined by a
disconnect
on what's important to him and what's
important to the voters who put him into
this office, especially for someone who
has been defined by the desire for
affirmation.
>> Sure. This has come up a lot. I mean,
the simple answer, and we hear this from
multiple people close to the president,
is he just sort of doesn't care the same
way. I mean, he is just going to do what
he wants. We talked about the
reparations era of Donald Trump, not
just for self, but just sort of for
life, for everything. You know, he felt
like he didn't get to enjoy his
presidency the first time because of the
Russia investigation and impeachments
and so forth and so on. And now he feels
like he is just going to do what he
wants. And he is not on the ballot again
himself. And so unless there is a direct
impact to him, he doesn't care. And yes,
he's not getting the media coverage that
he wants. That is true, at least in the
mainstream media. But he is getting a
lot of lavish praise from quarters like
Fox News, which actually wasn't this
all-in for him in term one. He has
business leaders sort of tripping over
themselves. Um, and he's being to praise
him and to give him money and to tell
him everything he's doing is fantastic.
And the thing that I I did want to say
about foreign policy that's the through
line with him. He's never been as
engaged on domestic policy as he has
been captivated by being seen as a
player on the global stage going back 40
years. I mean if you go back and you
look at everything he was doing in the
80s it was trying to be seen as an
expert on nuclear physics [laughter] or
somebody who you know might be able to
get Reagan's ear or somebody who could
meet with Gorbachev and so he's now
being recognized that way. fascinating
>> and he is living in a very very isolated
information bubble and it doesn't seem
to bother him at all. If it starts to,
we'll see. But he's content that he's
getting all the praise he needs. M I
mean Jonathan it just feels like and
this is what's useful about pausing at a
year mark and having this conversation
is that if MAGAism Trumpism was always a
transaction between the president and
the electorate it feels like his place
in this transaction is kind of over. Oh,
I see it so differently. I I don't think
it's a transaction at all. I think
Donald Trump is a, you know, we misuse
the word charisma, but actual charisma
historically understood, the ability to
have an emotional connection with
someone. That's the heart of the Donald
Trump movement. And to me, the big
question is when Donald Trump leaves the
scene and a more conventional politician
comes in, and let's face it, every one
of the people that we're discussing as
potential successes to him from JD Vance
on down are not Donald Trump on this.
Can that person glue together this
impossible coalition which includes
Lindsey Graham and Tucker Carlson?
People who despise each other,
[laughter] who diametrically opposed on
key issues, Donald Trump glues them
together through an almost sort of
supernatural, whatever you want to call
it, but like can a more conventional
politician glue together that coalition?
Like I'm very skeptical. So the more
that voters view Donald Trump as, "Yeah,
I I still kind of like him at some gut
level, but he's disappointed me on issue
X, issue Y, issue Z." The victim or the
person who bears the costs of that is
less likely to be Donald Trump than it
is to be JD Vance or whoever succeeds
him. Well, we have three more years to
figure out who will emerge as the
political heir to Donald Trump,
Jonathan. So, let's table that for the
moment. I want to ask the three of you a
bit of a curveball. I'm curious what
specific moment of this past year stands
out to you. Not necessarily in the
classic it was the most important moment
sense, but because for you it was the
most revealing and embodying of this
second term so far. For me, it really
was about the initial handling in the
summer of the Jeffrey Epstein files,
documents, material, whatever you want
to call it. Why?
>> This is another example of Trump
personalizing his presidency in the
sense that for him, he was never that
obsessed with the Jeffrey Epstein
matter. I mean, he did talk about it in
2015 in the context of Bill Clinton and
so forth, but he was never somebody who
made this his lifeblood. whereas it has
been a driving force for a lot of his
supporters. And there was just this
fundamental disconnect between himself
and aspects of his base on this. And
this was the first time, at least for
me, that we really saw that.
>> Charlie,
>> well, I spent so much time writing about
Venezuela and the boat strikes. I'll
I'll pick in September when he's got
some people in the Oval Office for a
completely unrelated issue and he
suddenly just kind of casually remarks,
"By the way, we blew some people out of
the water this morning. You're going to
be hearing more about that." and then a
few minutes later posts on his truth
social social media platform
>> what any administration would treat as
highly classified footage of this attack
>> and using this entirely personalized
medium truthocial.com
to put out this extremely official
important footage was striking. No other
president would have done that at all
but certainly no other president would
have done it the public presentation of
it in that way. Jonathan, what about
you?
[sighs]
>> There are sort of two moments. I know
that's not the rule, but um [laughter]
Oh,
>> I didn't know we could do that. I would
have done that.
>> The first
>> You're violating norms.
>> Exactly. Norms, not laws.
>> They're both images actually. Video. The
first was the tech billionaires on the
dis at the inauguration. Because if we
accept that AI is potentially as
transformative, if not more
transformative than the great
breakthroughs of the last century,
Donald Trump has taken America in a very
different direction in terms of
unleashing AI, giving these guys
basically everything they want. If you
think about what are the things that he
does that are going to outlast him,
that's going to be one of them.
>> This could be the most lastingly
transformational.
>> It could. Besides the the way he's
changed the presidency, the other one is
the assassination of Charlie Kirk. It
was
>> a horrifying moment. I can't get that
video out of my head. I talked to
Charlie Kirk the day before
>> he was assassinated. You know, someone
that I dealt with a lot. While Charlie's
death was a horrible tragedy, it was
also an opportunity for the Trump
administration to do what many of them
have wanted to do, including Donald
Trump, which is use government power to
crush the left, to dismantle the left,
to go after the institutional left, the
major groups on the left. If we do see
in the next 12 months efforts by the
Justice Department to dismantle,
prosecute the left's big groups, this
horrible assassination could be a real
catalyst of that story.
I want to end this conversation by
asking the three of you to briefly look
ahead [clears throat] to the rest of the
term and what is left for him to do
after doing so much in these past 365 or
so days. What's actually left for him to
do after everything he has done? Maggie.
>> Well, let's just take his revenge tour
specifically in the form of prosecutions
he wants to see. He has gotten
frustrated that courts have styied him,
that the Justice Department at times has
stymied him, that career prosecutors
have quit and said that they're not
going to go ahead with things. It
reminds me very much, frankly, of the
leadup to, you know, January 6, 2021,
when he was looking for anyone who would
give him what he wanted. He always
likes, as one of his friends said to me,
lawyers who will do anything. The
reality is he really likes fill-in-lank
who will do anything, you know, if he
asks them to. And so no one has been
convicted, no one has been put in jail.
And so far,
>> so that work is unfinished
>> for him.
>> Yes. And he has made quite clear vocally
to people around him that that work is
unfinished.
>> Mhm. Jonathan,
>> Donald Trump, I'm not saying he has a
fully developed framework for this, but
I think at an instinctive level, he's
quite sympathetic to the notion of
dividing the world up into spheres of
influence.
Meaning America is the hegeimon in the
western hemisphere and America has
complete domination over its own
neighborhood. You know, Venezuela is the
51st state, Canada is the 52nd state,
you know, go down the list. But that
potentially also leaves room for China
to take Taiwan, for Russia to obviously
they are going to get a large amount of
land out of whatever final arrangement
happens in in this war. It'll be
interesting to see how that evolves and
obviously the center of that
conversation is Donald Trump's
relationship with Xiinping and Vladimir
Putin and what concessions he makes to
them, how much room he gives them to
exert their own domination over their
neighborhoods.
>> Okay. So, putting enemies behind bars,
reorganizing the entire global order.
Charlie, do you have anything to add to
what you think might happen here? To add
one more thing to the table, I would
point to immigration enforcement as an
unfinished business that is already
becoming escalatory. Trump very quickly
managed to close the border. But what
has marked both his promises and what
his base elected him to do and what he's
now doing as aggressively as he can is
the interior enforcement. Mass sweeps
aimed at purging the country of many
millions of people who are here without
documentation. as we are seeing in
places right now like Minneapolis.
>> But the bottom line is there are
millions of people here that people like
Steven Miller do not want to be here and
finding them and taking them into
custody and pushing them through the
deportation hearing process in a way
that dramatically escalates the number
of people per year who are removed from
the country is a achievement that it
remains promised and yet undone. So what
all this seems to add up to is an
increased amount of tensions at home and
the use and the willingness to use hard
power in the streets of American cities,
especially Democratic cities, both ICE
agents in masks, acting very
aggressively and then backed by the
threat of and sometimes the reality of
federal troops in the streets of
American cities to protect and enhance
that effort. It seems very incendiary,
>> right? [music]
Yeah, I mean, as we sit here right now,
it really does feel like the country is
on edge. We're in this very precarious
moment where you've got Donald Trump's
assertion of power using the military,
using ICE in cities in a very
in-your-face way and a resistance
movement that is building up steam on
the left. And it just seems like that
collision is inevitable in a way that is
much more dramatic than we've seen so
far.
Well, Jonathan, Charlie, [music] Maggie,
thank you very much once again.
Appreciate it.
>> Thank you, [music] Michael.
>> Thank you. Thanks, Michael.
>> [music]
>> Over the weekend, President Trump once
again used his power in previously
unimaginable ways. His justice
department opened a criminal
investigation into Minnesota's
Democratic leaders, including the
state's governor, Tim Walls, and the
mayor of Minneapolis, Jacob Fry. Both of
whom have criticized Trump's immigration
crackdown in the state. The
investigation will focus on allegations
that both officials conspired to block
federal immigration officials from doing
their job. In a statement, Governor
Walls called the investigation a quote
dangerous authoritarian tactic.
We'll be right back.
Here's
[music]
what else you need to know today. Over
the weekend, President Trump threatened
in a social media post to slap major new
tariffs on European countries [music]
that oppose his plan to acquire
Greenland.
That drew outrage from European leaders
who said the threats amounted to [music]
economic warfare against longtime
allies. But Trump showed little sign of
backing down. On Sunday, in a moment of
bracing cander, Trump told the leader of
Norway that he no longer felt any
obligation to pursue a peaceful takeover
of Greenland because he said he [music]
was upset about not winning the Nobel
Peace Prize.
[music] and Spanish officials are
investigating the cause of a high-speed
train [music] crash that killed at least
40 people. It was Spain's deadliest
railroad accident in more [music] than a
decade. The crash occurred when the two
rear cars of one train derailed and
crossed into the path of another train.
The [music] resulting collision hurled
some passengers hundreds of feet from
the train.
Today's [music] episode was produced by
Rob Zipco, Alex Stern, Austa Churbatty,
and Mary Wilson with help [music] from
Jessica Chung. It was edited by Rachel
Quester. Contains music by Alicia,
Diane Wong, and Dan Powell, and was
engineered by Alyssa [music] Moxley.
That's [music] it for the Daily. I'm
Michael Bavaro.
See you tomorrow.
>> [music]